13. The burden of Babylon which Isaiah the son of Amos did see. Lift ye up a banner upon
the high mountain, exalt the voice unto them, shake the hand that they may go into the gates
of the nobles. I have commanded my sanctified ones, I have also called my mighty ones for my
anger, even them that rejoice in my highness. The noise of a multitude in the mountains,
like as of a great people, a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms and nations gathered together,
the Lord of hosts must rid the host of the battle. They come from a far country,
from the end of heaven, even the Lord and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole
land. How ye for the day of the Lord is at hand, it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty.
Therefore shall all hands be faint, and every man's heart shall melt, and they shall be afraid,
pains and sorrows shall take hold of them, they shall be in pain as a woman that travelleth,
they shall be amazed one at another, their faces shall be as flames. Behold the day of the Lord
cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the lame desolate, he shall destroy the
sinners thereof out of it. For the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall not
give their light, the sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her
light to shine. And I will punish the world for their evil, and the wicked for their iniquity,
and I will cause the arrogance of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the
terrible. I will make a man more precious than fine gold, even a man than the golden wedge of
ophir. Therefore I will shake the heavens, and the earth shall remove out of her place,
in the wrath of the Lord of hosts, and in the day of his fierce anger. And it shall be as the
chaste roe, and as a sheep that no man taketh up, they shall every man turn to his own people,
and flee every one into his own land. Every one that is found shall be thrust through,
and every one that is joined unto them shall fall by the sword. Their children also shall be dashed
to pieces before their eyes. Their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished. Behold,
I will stir up the meads against them, which shall not regard silver, and as for gold they
shall not delight in it. Their bows also shall dash the young men to pieces. They shall have
no pity on the fruit of the womb. Their eyes shall not spare children. And Babylon, the glory of
kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees, excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.
It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation,
neither shall the Arabian pitch-tent there, neither shall the shepherds make their fold there.
But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there, and their houses shall be full of doe-full
creatures, and owls shall dwell there, and satires shall dance there. And the wild beasts
of the islands shall cry in their desolate houses, and dragons in their pleasant palaces,
and her time is near to come, and her days shall not be prolonged.
Chapter 14 For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel,
and set them in their own land, and the strangers shall be joined with them,
and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob. And the people shall take them, and bring them
to their place, and the house of Israel shall possess them in the land of the Lord for servants
and handmaids, and they shall take them captives, whose captives they were, and they shall rule over
their oppressors. And it shall come to pass in the day that the Lord shall give them rest from thy
sorrow, and from thy fear, and from the hard bondage wherein thou wast made to serve,
that thou shalt take up this proverb against the king of Babylon, and say,
How hath the oppressor ceased, the Golan city ceased? The Lord hath broken the staff of the
wicked, and the scepter of the rulers. He who smote the people in wrath with a continual stroke,
he that ruled the nations in anger is persecuted, and none hindereth. The whole earth is at rest,
and is quiet. They break forth into singing. Yea, the fir trees rejoice at thee, and the
cedars of Lebanon, saying, Since thou art laid down, no feller has come up against us.
Hell from beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming. It stirreth up the dead for thee,
even all the chief ones of the earth. It hath raised up from their thrones all the kings of
the nations. All they shall speak, and say unto thee, Art thou also become weak as we? Art thou
become like unto us? Thy pomp is brought down to the grave, and the noise of thy vials, the worm
is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee. How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer,
son of the morning? How art thou cut down to the ground, which doth weaken the nations? For thou
hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars
of God, I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north. I will
ascend above the heights of the clouds, I will be like the Most High. Yet thou shalt be brought down
to hell, to the sides of the pit. They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider
thee same. Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that to shake kingdoms, that made the
world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities thereof, that opened not the house of his prisoners?
All the kings of the nations, even all of them, lie in glory, every one in his own house. But thou
art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch, and as the raiment of those that are slain,
thrust through with a sword, that go down to the stones of the pit, as a carcass trodden under feet.
Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou hast destroyed thy land, and slain
thy people. The seed of evildoers shall never be renowned. Prepare slaughter for his children,
for the iniquity of their fathers, that they do not rise, nor possess the land, nor fill the face
of the world with cities. For I will rise up against them, saith the Lord of hosts, and cut off
from Babylon the name, and remnant, and son, and nephew, saith the Lord. I will also make it a
possession for the bitter and pools of water, and I will sweep it with the besom of destruction,
saith the Lord of hosts. The Lord of hosts hath sworn, saying, Surely, as I have thought, so shall
come to pass, and as I have purposed, so shall it stand, that I will break the Assyrian in my land,
and upon my mountains tread him under foot, then shall his yoke depart from off them, and his burden
depart from off their shoulders. This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth,
and this is the hand that is stretched out upon all the nations. For the Lord of hosts hath purposed,
who shall disannul it, and his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back? In the year that
King Ahaz died was this burden. Rejoice not thou, whole Palestina, because the rod of him that
smote thee is broken, for out of the serpent's root shall come forth a cockatrice, and his fruit
shall be a fiery flying serpent. And the firstborn of the poor shall feed, and the needy shall lie
down in safety, and I will kill thy root with famine, and he shall slay thy remnant. How,
O gate, cry, O city, thou whole Palestina art dissolved, for there shall come from the north
a smoke, and none shall be alone in his appointed times. What shall one then answer the messengers
of the nation, that the Lord hath founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall trust in it?
Chapter 15. The burden of Moab. Because in the night, R of Moab is laid waste, and brought to
silence. Because in the night, Kur of Moab is laid waste, and brought to silence. He is gone up to
Bajith, and to dive on, the high places to weep. Moab shall howl over Nebo, and over Mediba. On all
our heads shall be baldness, and every beard cut off. In their streets they shall gird themselves
with sackcloth. On the tops of their houses, and in their streets, every one shall howl, weeping
abundantly. And Heshbon shall cry, and Elieli. Their voice shall be heard, even unto Jehaz.
Therefore the armed soldiers of Moab shall cry out. His life shall be grievous unto him. My heart
shall cry out for Moab. His fugitives shall flee unto Zohar, an heifer of three years old. For by
the mounting up of Luhith, with weeping shall they go it up. For in the way of Horanaim they
shall raise up a cry of destruction. For the waters of Nimrum shall be desolate. For the
hay is withered away, and the grass faileth. There is no green thing. Therefore the abundance
they have gotten, and that which they have laid up, shall they carry away to the brook of the
willows. For the cry has gone round about the borders of Moab, and the howling thereof unto
Eglem, and the howling thereof unto Birlim. For the waters of Daimon shall be full of blood. For I
will bring more upon Daimon, lions upon him that escapeth of Moab, and upon the remnant of the land.
End of chapters 13 to 15. Recording by Abigail Rasmussen.